Notifications on long-running operations and component templates management (#1748)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2023-07-07-long-running-operation-and-component-template.md

---
layout: post
title: "New for OpenSearch Dashboards: Long-running operation notifications and component templates"
authors:
  - ihailong
  - gbinlong
  - suzhou
  - gzhichao
  - kolchfa
date: 2023-07-07
categories:
  - technical-post
meta_keywords: index management, index operation UI, Notifications, OpenSearch Dashboards

> meta_description: Transform long-running operations, including Resize/Open/Force merge, into tasks and set up related notifications when a specific task finishes or fails. Simplify cluster operations with Index Management UI enhancements that enable you to manage component templates in a more user-friendly way.

Reviewer: Updated meta: 
**Meta_keywords:** OpenSearch index state management, index management UI, OpenSearch dashboards
**Meta_description:** Learn how OpenSearch simplifies cluster operations with index management UI enhancements that enable you to manage component templates in a user-friendly way.

> excerpt: Since version 2.7, OpenSearch Dashboards provides an interface you can use to manage notifications for long-running operations and component templates. You can subscribe to be notified of a specific task or type of tasks through any notification channel that the Notification plugin supports.

Reviewer 2: I just copied the first paragraph into the excerpt.

## Long-running operation notifications

In the past, if you ran a long-running operation, you needed to wait for it to complete, constantly refreshing to update the status. This was challenging when a task could take hours to finish. To alleviate the problem, OpenSearch introduced asynchronous tasks for `reindex` operations, making it possible for a time-consuming job to run in the background. However, admins still had to check the task status from time to time to ensure the task had progressed to its final state. Additionally, operations like `shrink` lacked the basic ability to run asynchronously.

### Transforming long-running operations into asynchronous tasks

> The `shrink`, `split`, `clone`, `open`, and `force_merge` operations are known to need roughly 30 minutes to finish for large indexes. If you want to run them asynchronously, you can transform these operations into tasks by setting the `wait_for_completion` query parameter to `false`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For large indexes, the `shrink`, `split`, `clone`, `open`, and `force_merge` operations are known to need roughly 30 minutes to finish. If you want to run them asynchronously, you can transform these operations into tasks by setting the `wait_for_completion` query parameter to `false`:
```

```json
POST /my-old-index/_shrink/my-new-index?wait_for_completion=false
{
  "settings": {
    "index.number_of_replicas": 4,
    "index.number_of_shards": 3
  },
  "aliases":{
    "new-index-alias": {}
  }
}
```

The preceding query returns a task ID that you can use to monitor the operation status. 

### Getting notified when asynchronous tasks finish or fail

To support notifications for long-running operations, we integrated tasks with notification channels. To be notified when a task finishes or fails, you can configure notification settings, as shown in the following image.

<img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2023-07-07-long-running-operation-and-component-template/notify-when-tasks-of-specific-type-finishes-or-fails.png" alt="Notify when tasks of specific type finishes or fails"/>{: .img-fluid }

For detailed instructions on configuring notifications, see [Notification settings](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/dashboards/im-dashboards/notifications/).

> ### Notifying additional people of an indexing operation

Reviewer 3: "users" instead of "people"?

> Sometimes you may want to notify additional people of the status of a specific operation, such as reindexing a production index. Index management provides the capability to amend default notifications with additional notifications for an individual operation, as shown in the following image.

Reviewer 3: "users" instead of "people"?

> Sometimes you may want to notify additional people of the status of a specific operation, such as reindexing a production index. Index management provides the capability to amend default notifications with additional notifications for an individual operation, as shown in the following image.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sometimes you may want to notify additional people of the status of a specific operation, such as the reindexing of a production index. Index management provides the capability to amend default notifications with additional notifications for an individual operation, as shown in the following image.
```

For more information, see [Configuring notification settings for an individual operation](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/dashboards/im-dashboards/notifications/#configuring-notification-settings-for-an-individual-operation).

### Configuring notifications through the API

You can use the `lron` API endpoint to configure notification settings for a task. For example, the following query sets up notifications when a reindex task fails:

```json
POST /_plugins/_im/lron
{
  "lron_config": {
      "task_id":"dQlcQ0hQS2mwF-AQ7icCMw:12354",
      "action_name":"indices:data/write/reindex",
      "lron_condition": {
        "success": false,
        "failure": true
      },
      "channels":[
          {"id":"channel1"},
          {"id":"channel2"}
      ]
  }
}
```

The `lron` API lets you create, retrieve, update, and delete notification settings. To learn more about these operations, see [Notification settings](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/im-plugin/notifications-settings/).

### Setting up fine-grained access control with notification permissions

> To limit access to notification setup to certain users, notifications are integrated with the Security plugin, which provides the following fine-grained permissions:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To limit notification setup access to certain users, notifications are integrated with the Security plugin, which provides the following fine-grained permissions:
```

> - `cluster:admin/opensearch/controlcenter/lron/get`: The user has permission to `view` the notification configs for long-running operations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `cluster:admin/opensearch/controlcenter/lron/get`: The user has permission to `view` the notification configs for long-running operations.
```

> - `cluster:admin/opensearch/controlcenter/lron/write`: The user has permission to `add or update` the notification configs for long-running operations.

Reviewer 3: "configurations" instead of "configs"? (Here and the following line)

- `cluster:admin/opensearch/controlcenter/lron/delete`: The user has permission to `delete` the notification configs for long-running operations.

> If a user lacks permissions to view notification settings, the user is notified to request permissions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If a user lacks permissions to view notification settings, they are prompted to request permissions.
```

> <img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2023-07-07-long-running-operation-and-component-template/security-enabled.png" alt="Security enabled"/>{: .img-fluid }

Reviewer 3: Reference the image in the text that precedes it.

## Component templates

Component templates let you create a single index pattern that matches multiple indexes. You can combine multiple component templates to create an index template.

### Creating component templates

> When you create index templates through the API, it may be difficult to tell what the index template will be like after merging all the associated component templates with their own configurations. Now when you create or update an index template through the UI, you can preview the template in OpenSearch Dashboards.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you create index templates through the API, it may be difficult to determine what the index template will be like after merging all the associated component templates with their own configurations. Now when you create or update an index template through the UI, you can preview the template in OpenSearch Dashboards.
```

> When you create index templates through the API, it may be difficult to tell what the index template will be like after merging all the associated component templates with their own configurations. Now when you create or update an index template through the UI, you can preview the template in OpenSearch Dashboards.

Reviewer 3: "what the index template will be like" is a bit vague. Can we more precisely state our meaning?

> <img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2023-07-07-long-running-operation-and-component-template/component-based-template-creation-experience.png" alt="Component-based template creation experience"/>{: .img-fluid }

Reviewer 3: Reference the image in the text that precedes it.

For detailed instructions on creating component templates, see [Component templates](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/dashboards/im-dashboards/component-templates/).

### Managing index templates with the aggregated index template view

> Using the API, it is difficult to tell how many index templates are using a single component template. Now OpenSearch Dashboards provides an aggregated view of all index templates associated with a particular component template so you can easily manage them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Using the API, it may be difficult to determine how many index templates are using a single component template. Now OpenSearch Dashboards provides an aggregated view of all index templates associated with a particular component template so you can easily manage them.
```

> <img src="/assets/media/blog-images/2023-07-07-long-running-operation-and-component-template/aggregated-view-to-help-admin-better-manage-index-templates-with-component-templates.png" alt="Aggregated view to help admin better manage index templates with component templates"/>{: .img-fluid }

Reviewer 3: Reference the image in the text that precedes it.

## Next steps

> We are exploring new ways to use the notification framework for other asynchronous task scenarios that require timely notifications. If you have any feedback or suggestions, join the discussion on the [OpenSearch forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/). 

Reviewer 3: "notifications framework"?
